The land from Punta Inuod to Guinabihan, Banilan is where the first settlers Gat Maitan and his wife Panumbalihan, and Gat Silayan Maginto and his wife Potongan first established themselves. After a series of raids by pirates and marauders, they moved to the present site of the Poblacion, leaving behind, Chief Maginoong Dalaga, who ruled the place. This accounts explain why Pakil has two territories on the eastern and western sides of the lake.Gat Maitan and Gat Silayan are one of the borne-leaders from the ancient town of Malolos which called by pre-colonial Chinese traders from Fujian as "Lihan" where Gats and Lacandolas abundantly resides along the shores of Manila Bay under the Kingdom of Tondo.Gat Silayan actually is one of the member of the ruling clan of Lihan whose names bearing prefix "gat" a royal title. Every members of the clan in Malolos called "Gat", and it became "Gatchalian",Gatmaitan,together with Lakandula and Gatbonton at the course of time[4]

When the Spaniards Conquistadores together with the Augustinians stationed at Laguna came to the place in 1571, this colony was under the leadership of Gat Paquil a descendant of Gat Maitan whose name was used to name the settlement as "Paquil", which remained during the whole Spanish Regime and early part of the American period. It was changed to "Pakil" by Executive Order No. 77 in 1927.

When the Franciscan missionaries came in 1578 Order of Friars Minor (OFM) Pakil was attached to Paete in 1602 as its "visita". Padre Francisco Barajas, made efforts to separate this town from Paete, and Don Diego Jorge became the first Capitan Municipal or Gobernadorcillo on May 12, 1676 and finally Pakil was named as an independent town with the administration of "Capitan Municipal" at the helm of the local colonial government, the last of whom was Capitan Municipal Don Nicolas Regalado.

With the change of government from Spanish to American upon the total Occupation of the United States in the Philippines after the defeat of the Filipino Forces in Philippine -American War of 1898-1900, the Amercans has to reorganize the pattern of the Civil Government in the country in 1901. It was Bernardo Gonzales was appointed the first Municipal President (Presidente Municipal) under American Period until November 25, 1903. Upon this reorganization,the Public Law No. 1009, of the Philippine Commission, the town of Pakil was merged with Pangil in order to reduced the number of existing towns whereas the weak towns to be merged with the stable one for the stabilization of local economy due to the damagees of the previous wars. After Nineteen years, On October 1, 1927, by virtue of Executive Order No. 77, Pakil was re-established into town thus the Municipality of Pakil was restored.

In 1942, the Japanese troops occupied in Pakil, Laguna and in 1945, the liberated from the Philippine Commonwealth forces under the Philippine Army and Philippine Constabulary entering in Pakil, Laguna with the local recognized guerrillas against the Japanese forces during the Second World War.

In 1954, the sitios known as Casa Real, Casinsin and Kabulusan were converted into barrios.[5][6][7] Durado followed suit in 1957.[8]
 